---
layout: post
title: My encounter with IPython
---

Ipython began as a side project of Fernando Pérez in 2001, as a more interactive python interpreter. Presently, it is one of the most important tool for scientific computing.
Ipython is designed to increase productivity in both interactive computing and software development, it doesn't provide any computational tools itself though. Instead of typical *edit-compile-run* work flow of compiled languages, it provides *execute-explore* work flow. Also, it has excellent integration with shell and file system.

**Getting Started**
IPython can be launched by simply typing *ipython* on the terminal. When we type just a variable name on the ipython, it renders a string representation of the object. IPython also does pretty printing of objects, to make them more readable, like dictionaries etc. It also facilitates a better copy-paste of python scripts.

***Tab completion*** - It is present in python3, but not in python2. Ipython provides tab completion. One difference is that python3 provides tab completion with magic methods and internal private methods and attributes, while ipython prefers to skip them. It can be changed in ipython configuration, or to view them we will have to type in _ first and then press tab.
What actually comes handy is integration with the shell and file system. Commands like ls, cd etc. can help in locating source file and then %run like commands are a complete bliss. Tab completion in these commands helps in completing the address, like in the shell.
***Object Introspection*** - I first came across this type of feature in haskell's ghci interpreter. Using a simple '?' at the end of any object name will give details about it (like using :t before any function name in haskell). If the object is a function or a class, it's docstring if defined will be shown. Replacing '?' by '??' will also source code of the function if possible.
Also, it can be used as a wildcard (in a manner similar to UNIX or Windows command line) for searching the IPython namespace. It is used in combined relation with wildcard (*), placing '?' at the end, to get the possible values in the namespace.

***Running scripts in IPython*** - Using the %run command, any script will be loaded in the IPython and executed. Any command line argument can be specified after the file name. This is similar to ghci's ':load' command. The script will be run in an empty namespace, i.e. no previous imports and variables available, as if the script is run on the command line. All the objects defined in the script (up until any exception, if any) will then be available in IPython shell.

***Copy and paste in IPython*** - Python interpreter provides means to paste code in the terminal, using <Ctrl+Shift+v>. However, in many cases, it fails due to improper indentations or extra new lines. IPython doesn't give indentation error in case of extra new line, but doesn't give desired result either. To overcome this, magic functions like %paste and %cpaste have been provided. The %paste copies the entire text on the clipboard onto the IPython shell (in some cases we may need python-tk to use %paste). The %cpaste is similar, but we can keep pasting text clipboard till '--' is typed in. It is also useful, as it doesn't immediately execute the pasted code - we can check if it is the desired snippet or not and then break out if it isn't.

***Keyboard shortcuts*** - Unix command line short cuts like <Ctrl+a> for line starting and <Ctrl+e> for line end also work with IPython shell. Other common commands are:
<Ctrl+b> One character backwards
<Ctrl+f> One character forward
<Ctrl+l> Clear screen
<Ctrl+u> Remove all text presently on the line
<Ctrl+k> Remove all text from present position of cursor till the end of line
<Ctrl+p> Search backward in history for command beginning with entered text
<Ctrl+n> Search forward in history for command beginning with entered text
All these work with python2 and python3 interpreters too.



